---
layout: post
title: "Add support for O_DSYNC in aio_fsync()"
date: 2024-08-02
categories: [GSoC]
tags: [GSoC]
excerpt: "Adding support for the operator O_DSYNC in aio_fsync()."
author: Alessandro Nardin
---

The second issue I addressed was a lack of functionality in the aio_fsync function. According to the specifications, the `op` parameter of the function can have two values: `O_SYNC` and `O_DSYNC`. This value indicates what kind of synchronization has to be performed on the file. Specifically, `O_SYNC` will sync the file as per a call to `fsync()`, while `O_DSYNC` corresponds to a call to `fdatasync()`.

Before beginning the work on this part, I encountered a blocking issue. Specifically, O_DSYNC was not defined. I discovered this while looking for existing issues related to my project. The issue I found was issue #1683, which highlighted the missing definitions of `O_DSYNC` and `O_RSYNC` in Newlib. After verifying that the issue was not outdated and discussing the problem with my mentors, we reached the following solution: To allow me to begin the work on that part, I would temporarily define the missing macros in the installed files of Newlib on my machine. While I did this, my mentor submitted a patch to Newlib that added the missing macros. This way, I managed to begin writing a first version of the fix.

Adding this functionality did not require much code. The main change was in the body of the thread(s) servicing the requests. In the code, there’s a switch statement that identifies the kind of operation; I had to add another case for the new sync operation. I also had to modify the `aio_fsync()` function to allow the use of the `O_DSYNC` value.

After the update to Newlib, I opened a Merge Request (MR!128) to get feedback on the code. The review process highlighted an issue that needed to be fixed:

The implementation used some opcodes to identify the various types of operations. The codes used were those defined in the aio.h header and required by `lio_listio()`. However, since the specification only includes opcodes for the read and write operations (`LIO_READ` and `LIO_WRITE`), some additional ones were defined in the aio.h header. Since these additional opcodes were only for internal use, and the others were intended to be used with `lio_listio()`, under the suggestion of my mentor, I deleted the additional codes from `aio.h` and defined private opcodes for each operation. I then modified the various functions, making all the code use the new private opcodes to identify the various operations internally.

After this and other smaller formatting corrections, the code got merged. After the merge, however, Coverity highlighted an issue in the newly added code. It marked a branch of an if statement as dead code, with the following message:

```
New defect(s) Reported-by: Coverity Scan
Showing 1 of 1 defect(s)


** CID 1616018:  Control flow issues  (DEADCODE)
/cpukit/posix/src/aio_fsync.c: 83 in aio_fsync()


________________________________________________________________________________________________________
*** CID 1616018:  Control flow issues  (DEADCODE)
/cpukit/posix/src/aio_fsync.c: 83 in aio_fsync()
77         rtems_set_errno_and_return_minus_one( EAGAIN );
78     
79       req->aiocbp = aiocbp;
80       if ( op == O_SYNC ) {
81         req->op_type = AIO_OP_SYNC;
82       } else {
>>>     CID 1616018:  Control flow issues  (DEADCODE)
>>>     Execution cannot reach this statement: "req->op_type = 3;".
83         req->op_type = AIO_OP_DSYNC;
84       }
85       
86       return rtems_aio_enqueue( req );
```

I tried to understand the reason for this message but was unsuccessful. After some investigation, my mentors discovered the reason for this error. Both `O_SYNC` and `O_DSYNC` are mapped to the same value, and since `O_SYNC` and `O_DSYNC` are the only two values permitted for op (this condition was checked by an earlier line in the function), when execution reached line 80, the condition was always true.

To solve this problem, we ended up reverting some of the changes made, removing the handling of `O_DSYNC` from `aio_fsync()`. This does not actually remove support for `O_DSYNC`, but since both constants have the same value, `O_DSYNC` will be treated as `O_SYNC`. This solution only works if `O_DSYNC==O_SYNC`. To be notified if that changes, we added the following code to the `aio_fsync.c` file:

```c
#if (O_DSYNC != O_SYNC)
  #error "Implementation assumes O_DSYNC == O_SYNC. Update if this changes."
#endif 
```

In this way, we will know if the values change and can reintroduce support for both values.
